Title: Type 1 Diabetes
Source: WebMD
URL: https://www.webmd.com/diabetes/type-1-diabetes
Collected: 2025-11-15T16:15:53.663149

================================================================================

What Is Type 1 Diabetes?

Type 1 Diabetes Symptoms

Type 1 Diabetes in Children

Type 1 Diabetes Causes

Type 1 Diabetes Risk Factors

Type 1 Diabetes Diagnosis

Type 1 Diabetes Health Disparities

Type 1 Diabetes Treatment

Living With Type 1 Diabetes

Type 1 Diabetes Complications

What Is Type 1 Diabetes?

Type 1 diabetes is a condition in which your immune system destroys insulin-making cells (beta cells) in your pancreas. That means your body can't make enough insulin or any at all.

Insulin is a hormone that helps move glucose (sugar) from your blood and into your cells so it can be used for energy.

Because type 1 diabetes is often diagnosed in kids and young adults, it used to be called juvenile diabetes. In the past, it was also called insulin-dependent diabetes.

Are you born with type 1 diabetes?

You can get it at any age. In fact, half of all people now diagnosed with type 1 diabetes are adults.

Type 1 diabetes vs. secondary diabetes

A condition called secondary diabetes is like type 1, but your insulin-making cells are wiped out by another health condition or an injury to your pancreas, rather than by your immune system.

Type 1 diabetes vs. type 2diabetes

If you have type 1, your body doesn't make enough insulin. Withtype 2 diabetes, your body can make insulin but can't use it well. The cells in your muscles, fat, and liver build up what's called insulin resistance.

With type 1 diabetes, you need to use man-made insulin every day so your body can function. But not everyone with type 2 diabetes needs it. Other medications can help you manage the condition.

No matter which type of diabetes you have, you'll need to keep a close eye on your daily habits, such as what you eat and how much activity you get to stay healthy.

Keeping a close eye on your blood sugar is a key part of managing diabetes. A continuous glucose monitor lets you check your levels in real time. (Photo Credit: Moment/Getty Images)

Type 1 Diabetes Symptoms

Symptoms can come on very quickly. They include:

Increased hunger(especially after eating)

Upset stomach and vomiting

Unexplained weight loss (despite eating and often feeling hungry)

Feeling tired or weak for no reason

Heavy, labored breathing (your doctor may call this Kussmaul respiration)

Repeated infections of your skin, urinary tract, or vagina

Late-onset type 1diabetes symptoms

More research is being done on what's calledLatent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults(LADA). Some people refer to this as "Diabetes 1.5" or "Diabetes 1 1/2" because it overlaps with parts of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

LADA symptomscan come on very slowly, making it tricky to diagnose. So does the fact that people who have it are usually at a healthy weight, and often between the ages of 30 and 50 years.

Type 1 Diabetes in Children

Your child is at higher risk of type 1 diabetes if:

They're aged 4-6 years or 10-14 years.

Another family member also has it.

Type 1 diabetes symptoms in children

The signs are the same as for adults, but you may also notice:

More diaper changes for a baby

Diaper rash that doesn't get better when treated

Bed-wetting in kids who are potty-trained

Fruity-smelling breath

In some babies or kids, type 1 diabetes can also look like the flu.

If you notice any of these symptoms, take your child to the doctor.

Type 1 Diabetes Causes

Experts aren't sure what causes your pancreas to stop making insulin for your body. Your genes and immune system both appear to play big roles.

Is type 1 diabetes genetic?

If you're assigned male at birth (AMAB) and have type 1 diabetes, there's a 1 in 17 chance that your child will have it, too.

If you're assigned female at birth (AFAB) and have type 1 diabetes, your child's risk is 1 in 25 if they were born before you turned 25, and 1 in 100 if they were born after your 25th birthday.

If both you and your partner have type 1 diabetes, the chance that your child will have it as well could be as high as 1 in 4.

Once you inherit genes that put you at risk for type 1, an environmental trigger such as an infection, virus, orautoimmune disorder, seems necessary to "switch" them on.

When scientists look atthe blood of people with type 1, they can see special proteins that show their immune system is going after their pancreas.

Type 1 Diabetes Risk Factors

Only about 5%-10% of people with diabetes have type 1. The risk factors for it aren't as clear as they are for type 2 diabetes.

So far, experts only know that you’re more likely to have it if you:

Have a parent or sibling with type 1

Type 1 Diabetes Diagnosis

If your doctor thinks you have type 1 diabetes, they’ll check your blood sugar levels. This can be done in a few different ways.

A1c test.Also called a glycated hemoglobin test, it can figure out your average blood sugar levels over the past 3 months with one small blood sample. It does that by counting the number of hemoglobin (red blood) cells that are sticky with glucose.

If your A1c result is 6.5% or higher, you'll retake the test. If it's the same number or higher, you likely have diabetes.

This test may not give you a correct result if you have any of the following:

Some blood disorders, such as sickle cell anemia

Certain medicines, such as HIV drugs, in your system

If you're of African, Mediterranean, or Southeast Asian descent, you could also have a different type of hemoglobin (called a hemoglobin variant) that could skew your A1c result. Let your doctor know if any of these apply to you. If so, they can test your blood sugar in different ways, such as

Fasting blood sugar test.In this test, your blood's taken after you haven't eaten overnight. A result of 126 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or higher on two separate tests signals diabetes.

Random blood sugar test.Your blood glucose can also be checked at a random time. Whether or not you've recently eaten, a result of 200 mg/dL or higher means diabetes.

The above tests can show whether you have diabetes, but they can't tell you which type. To find out whether you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes, your doctor will need to look for:

Autoantibodies.These are the proteins in your immune system that attack healthy cells, such as beta cells in your pancreas that make insulin. If you have type 1 diabetes, they'll show up in a blood sample.

Ketones. When you have type 1, your body relies on acids called ketones for fuel because it doesn't have enough glucose to use. A urine (pee) test can detect them.

Type 1 Diabetes Health Disparities

Across the U.S., type 1 diabetes is on the rise. Hispanic and Black communities are affected more than others. For instance, studies show that if you have brown or black skin, controlling your blood glucose once you're diagnosed is more of a challenge. Black children with type 1 diabetes are also at higher risk ofdepression, diabetes complications, and hospital stays.

Structural racism plays a big part in explaining this inequality. Many long-standing laws and policies discriminate against people of color. So do systems such as health care.

Type 1 Diabetes Treatment

You can be diagnosed with type 1 diabetes and live a long, healthy life. Keeping a close eye on your blood sugar levels will be key. Your doctor will give you a target range, and making healthy choices daily will help you stay within that range. It's also important to know the symptoms of very high or low blood sugar, and how to treat them.

Type 1 diabetes medications

You'll also need to use insulin every day.

When your doctor talks about insulin, they’ll mention three main things:

"Onset" is how long it takes to reach your bloodstream and begin lowering your blood sugar.

"Peak time" is when insulin is doing the most work in terms of lowering your blood sugar.

"Duration" is how long it keeps working after onset.

Several types of insulin are available.

Rapid-acting insulinstarts to work in about 15 minutes. It peaks about 1 hour after you take it and continues to work for 2-4 hours.

Regular or short-acting insulingets to work in about 30 minutes. It peaks between 2 and 3 hours and keeps working for 3-6 hours.

Intermediate-acting insulinwon’t get into your bloodstream for 2-4 hours after your shot. It peaks within 4-12 hours and works for 12-18 hours.

Long-acting insulintakes several hours to get into your system and lasts about 24 hours.

Insulin doesn't come in pill form, so you'll have to rely on other ways to get it into your body:

Insulin injections.Most insulin shots come in a small glass bottle called a vial. You draw it out with a syringe that has a needle on the end and give yourself the shot. Some kinds come in a prefilled pen.

Inhaled insulin.Your doctor may prescribe a rapid-acting insulin that you breathe into your mouth through a small device. It's not healthy to use this type if you smoke or have lung issues such as asthma.

Insulin pump.This device, which you wear, sends small bursts of insulin into your body throughout the day. It does this through a small tube just under your skin.

Your doctor will help you pick the type of insulin and delivery method that’s best for you.

Continuous glucose monitoring

Checking your blood sugar throughout the day will help make sure it stays within your target range. Pricking your finger and testing a blood sample with a blood glucose meter is one way to check. Many people also choose to wear a continuous glucose monitor (CGM).

Using a sensor just under your skin, this device can check your glucose every few minutes. Most models will alert you if it goes too high or too low, so you can treat it right away.

Other type 1 diabetes medications

Based on your health, your doctor could also prescribe:

Aspirin, to lower your risk of a heart event

Cholesterol-lowering drugs, to protect your heart

High blood pressure medication, to improve your kidney function

Living With Type 1 Diabetes

To feel your best, try to:

Get enough sleep. It can improve your blood sugar as well as your outlook. If you can, aim for at least 7 hours each night. Babies, kids, and teens will need even more.

Manage your stress. It's really common to feel angry or overwhelmed that you have type 1. Find healthy ways to reduce your stress. Talk to trusted friends and family members or ask your doctor to refer you to a counselor or therapist.

Quit smoking.Vaping and chewing tobacco are habits to stop, too. All these things narrow yourblood vesselsand put you at risk for other health issues. Talk to your doctor if you're not sure how to quit.

Visit your doctor regularly. Regular medical, dental, and eye exams can help you prevent issues, or treat them as soon as they're found.

Find ways to be active.Try to find a physical activity you enjoy. Even taking care of your garden counts. Talk to your doctor about how to balance your insulin dose and the food you eat with any activity you do.

Once you know how carbs, fats, and protein affect your blood sugar, you can build a healthy eating plan that helps keep your levels where they should be. Generally speaking, you'll focus on eating lots of nutrient-rich vegetables, fruits, and whole grains while cutting back on refined carbohydrates, such as white bread or pasta, which quickly raise your blood sugar.

No foods is off-limits, but you will need to limit some or enjoy smaller portions than you used to.

A diabetes educator or registered dietitian can help you learn to count carbohydrates at each meal and snack. If you're not sure how to connect with these experts, ask your doctor.

Type 1 Diabetes Complications

If your blood sugar isn't well-managed, it can lead to other health issues, including:

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).If your body can't get enough glucose for fuel, it breaks down fat cells instead. This creates chemicals called ketones. Your liver releases the sugar it stores to help out. But your body can’t use it without insulin, so it builds up in your blood, along with the acidic ketones. This mix of extra glucose, dehydration, and acid buildup is known as ketoacidosis and can be life-threatening if not treated right away.

Heart disease.Diabetes can put you at higher risk ofblood clots, high blood pressure, and cholesterol. These can lead to chest pain, heart attack, stroke, or heart failure.

Skin conditions.You're more likely to get blisters and rashes, as well as bacterial or fungal infections.

Gum disease.A dry mouth, increased plaque, and poor blood flow can all cause mouth issues.

Pregnancy complications.Type 1 diabetes raises your risk of early delivery, birth defects, stillbirth, andpreeclampsia.

Retinopathy.This eye issue happens in about 80% of adults who have had type 1 diabetes for more than 15 years. To prevent it and to keep your eyesight,you'll need to control your blood sugar, blood pressure, cholesterol, and triglycerides.

Kidney damage.About 20%-30% of people with type 1 diabetes get a condition called nephropathy. The chance of getting it goes up over time. It’s most likely to show up 15-25 years after the onset of diabetes. It can lead to other serious problems such as kidney failure and heart disease.

Poor blood flow and nerve damage.Damaged nerves and hardened arteries lead to a loss of feeling in, and a lack of blood supply to, your feet. This raises your chances of injury and makes it harder for open sores and wounds to heal. When that happens, you could lose a limb. Nerve damage can also cause digestive problems such as nausea, vomiting, anddiarrhea.

Exciting new treatments in the works include:

Glucose monitoring without needle sticks.This is proving to be a challenge for scientists.

Continuous ketone monitor (CKM). Like a CGM, a wearable device would monitor the fluid between your cells.

Longer-acting insulin. For instance, one type would keep your blood glucose steady for a week.

Immunotherapy.Some experts are looking for ways to "switch off" your immune system so it stops attacking the cells in your pancreas that make insulin.

"New" beta cells.One early-stage Australian study was able to get pancreatic stem cells to make insulin. If testing pans out, your remaining pancreas cells may be treated one day to start makinginsulinagain.

Keep up with new research on type 1 diabetes through a trusted organization such as the CDC or the American Diabetes Association.

Type 1 diabetes is a lifelong condition. A diagnosis may feel overwhelming, but you can learn to manage your blood sugar. Making healthy choices every day will be key.

American Diabetes Association: "Diabetes Basics: Type 1," "Exercise and Type 1 Diabetes," "Insulin Routines," "Insulin Basics," "Insulin Pumps," "Skin Complications," "DKA (Ketoacidosis) & Ketones," "Complications," "Heart Disease," "High Blood Pressure," "Physical Activity is Important," "Exercising with Diabetes Complications," "Genetics of Diabetes."

Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation: "Fact Sheets: Type 1 Diabetes Facts."

Joslin Diabetes Center: "The Truth About the So-Called Diabetes Diet."

Mayo Clinic: "Type 1 diabetes," "Type 1 diabetes in children," "Diabetes treatment: Using insulin to manage blood sugar."

Nemours/KidsHealth: "Type 1 Diabetes: What Is It?" "Long-term Complications of Diabetes."

CDC: "Diabetes," "What is Type 1 Diabetes?" "Diabetes Risk Factors," "All About Your A1C," "Just Diagnosed With Type 1 Diabetes."

International Diabetes Federation: "Diabetes and cardiovascular disease."

Reviews in Obstetrics and Gynecology: "Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus and Pregnancy."

National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse: "Your Guide to Diabetes: Type 1 and Type 2," "Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Heart and Blood Vessels Healthy," "Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Kidneys Healthy," "Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Feet Healthy," "Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Mouth Healthy," "Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Eyes Healthy," "Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Diabetes under Control."

National Diabetes Education Program: "4 Steps to Manage Your Diabetes for Life."

American Heart Association: "Cholesterol Abnormalities and Diabetes."

Cleveland Clinic: "Type 1 vs Type 2 Diabetes: What's the Difference?" "Oral Diabetes Medications."

Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Type 1 diabetes in children."

Diabetes UK: "Latest Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults (LADA)."

Yale Medicine: "Type 1 Diabetes: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment."

University of Maryland Medical System: "What Does It Mean If You Have Fruity Breath?"

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: "The A1C Test & Diabetes," "Diabetes Tests & Diagnosis," "Managing Diabetes."

UCSF Diabetes Teaching Center: "Ketones in Type 1 Diabetes."

Health Affairs:"Systemic and Structural Racism: Definitions, Examples, Health Damages, And Approaches to Dismantling."

Pediatrics:"Racial Disparities in Pediatric Type 1 Diabetes: Yet Another Consequence of Structural Racism."

Clinical Diabetes:"Inequities in Health Outcomes in Children and Adults With Type 1 Diabetes: Data From the T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative."

BMJ:"New advances in type 1 diabetes."

Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy:"EZH2 inhibitors promote β-like cell regeneration in young and adult type 1 diabetes donors."

Might My Child Have Type 1 Diabetes?

Giving Yourself an Insulin Shot for Diabetes

What to Eat When You Have Type 1 Diabetes

Blood Sugar Levels for Young Children With Diabetes

Blood Sugar Levels for Kids and Teens With Diabetes