Title: Differences between stool softeners and other laxatives
Source: MedicalNewsToday
URL: https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322621
Collected: 2025-11-15T17:08:17.693529

================================================================================

Laxatives are products that help people empty their bowels, and there are many types. Stool softeners are a type of laxative, but not all laxatives are stool softeners. Although some other laxatives also soften the stool, they have different methods of action.

All laxatives work in different ways, each with the intention of helping relieve constipation. Understanding the differences between laxatives and stool softeners may help a person decide which one to use.

Anyone dealing with regular constipation may also choose to make a few changes to their diet and lifestyle, which might help regulate their bowel movements.

This article discusses the differences between stool softeners and laxatives.

What are stool softeners and laxatives?

The term “laxative” refers to awide rangeof substances, including stool softeners. A laxative is any medications or supplement that helps the body have a bowel movement.

Eachlaxativeworks differently, and a healthcare professional may suggest it as afirst-line treatmentalongside dietary and lifestyle advice to help relieve constipation.

Stool softeners are a type of laxative that work to gently lubricate the stool by adding a compound to it that absorbs water. Stool softeners are also called emollient laxatives.

There are many types of laxatives because there are many different causes of constipation. Healthcare professionals may recommend different types of laxatives depending on the cause of constipation or side effects of the medications.

Other types of laxativescan include:

Osmotic laxatives:Thesedraw water intothe intestines from the surrounding tissues.

Bulk-forming laxatives:Often derivedfrom plants, these laxatives help form a watery gel in the intestines that adds both body and lubrication to the stool.

Stimulant laxatives:These arefast-acting laxativesthat can stimulate the intestines into having a bowel movement.

Saline laxatives:These magnesium-based laxativespull water intothe intestines.

Lubricant laxatives:These are oily laxatives that coat the intestines to help move stool through quicker.

Guanylate cyclase-C agonist laxatives:Certain drugsboth increasewater in the gastrointestinal tract and make the stool move through the colon faster.

A person should take only one type of laxative at a time. They should also consult a healthcare professional before switching between them to avoid any interactions or complications.

Read more about constipation.

Which laxative is safest for me?

In most cases, a healthcare professional will know which type of laxative they should prescribe based on a person’s symptoms and what is causing them.

Stool softeners are gentle medications with a relatively mild effect. Theytypically containdocusate sodium and docusate calcium as the active ingredients.

They help soften the stool, making it easier to pass. Over-the-counter (OTC) stool softeners are useful when a person experiences temporary, mild, or chronic constipation.

Healthcare professionals may prescribe stool softeners after major surgeries, such as heart surgery orherniarepair. If straining to have a bowel movement might be harmful during recovery, people can take stool softeners to avoid complications.

Osmotic laxatives work by drawing water into the intestines to help soften the stool and help it move. They usually contain polyethylene glycol and glycerin as their active ingredients. They may not be the best option for people experiencing constipation fromdehydration.

Anyone using osmotic laxatives should also drink more water throughout the day. If used correctly, osmotic laxatives may be suitable for long-term use.

Fiber-based laxatives

Healthcare professionals may recommend a bulk-forming laxative containing soluble fiber if a persondoes not geta lot of fiber in their regular diet.

These laxatives often contain psyllium, methylcellulose, and calcium polycarbophil, which help form a gel in the stool that helps it hold more water and become larger, which stimulates the intestines.

Bulk-forming laxatives may be safer for long-term use than other options, as they have little risk of long-term side effects when taken correctly. However, they may take longer than other laxatives to work.

Healthcare professionals may also recommend fiber-based laxatives for people who have chronic, long lasting constipation.

Like osmotic laxatives, saline laxativespull water intothe stool. Saline laxatives do this using mineral salts, such asmagnesium citrateor magnesium oxide.

Saline laxatives are not suitable for everyone. For instance, people who take medication to lower their sodium levels or are taking other mineral-based drugs, such as medications to reduce calcium in the kidneys, should avoid saline laxatives.

Saline laxatives are useful for short-term constipation. Using them for extended periods may lead to dehydration or cause an imbalance in other minerals.

If someone is unsure about the potential medication interactions that saline laxatives could cause, they should contact a healthcare professional for advice.

Doctors may recommend laxatives containing oils such asmineral oilfor difficult, short-term constipation, but these are not suitable for regular use. The oils in these laxatives may stick to fat-solublevitaminsand make them impossible to digest.

Stimulant laxatives are a good option for fast relief from painful constipation. They often contain bisacodyl and sennosides as active ingredients.

The stimulating effect of these laxatives makes the stoolmove fasterthrough the colon while increasing the liquid in the stool. Many popular OTC brand names contain stimulant laxatives.

Stimulant laxatives are not safe for regular use. Using them regularly may cause the body to become dependent on the laxative to have a bowel movement.

Guanylate cyclase-C agonist laxatives

Doctors may prescribe guanylate cyclase-C agonist laxatives, such as linaclotide (Linzess),in casesof chronic constipation that have no known cause or that are due toirritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

These laxatives, along with lifestyle changes, may offer a solution for people who have chronic constipation. It is not advisable for young children to use them.

Read more about medications for constipation.

Stool softeners may be most effective when a person does not need immediate relief but is looking to regulate their bowel movements within the next few days.

The type of laxative a healthcare professional recommends may also change based on how quickly a person needs relief. Individual result times may vary, but in general, the following applies:

Quick relief:Saline laxatives tend to work very fast.

Medium relief:Stimulant laxatives are fast-acting, but they still take some time to work.

Slow relief:Other laxatives, including bulk-forming fibers, stool softeners, and guanylate cyclase-C agonist laxatives, take longer to work.

The authors of a2015 studylooking at constipation in older adults observe the following:

Osmotic laxatives, including magnesium citrate and magnesium hydroxide, may produce a bowel movement in 30 minutes to 6 hours. Others may not take effect for 24–48 hours.

Stimulant laxatives, such as Dulcolax and Senna, may take 6–12 hours.

Stool softeners, such as Docusate, may take 24–48 hours.

Fiber-based laxatives, including Fibercon andMetamucil, can take 12–72 hours.

Natural stool softeners

Healthcare professionalsoften recommendthat people with constipation make lifestyle changes to help ease their symptoms. Many people can find relief from constipation by drinking plenty of water and getting regularexercise.

A person can increase their daily fiber intake by including more fruits and vegetables in their diet. Fiber-rich foods that can help with constipation include:

Prunes:Prunes can help people stay regular. They contain both soluble and insoluble fiber, which may help absorb water and give body to the stool.

Apples:Applesare rich in pectin, a helpful soluble fiber. Try including apples as a snack between meals.

Pulses:Mostbeans,lentils, garbanzo beans, andpeasare high in fiber, which helps promote good digestion and reduces constipation.

Learn more about natural stool softeners.

Side effects of laxatives

All laxatives come with the risk of side effects. Some side effects are temporary, while others may be severe enough to warrant a change in medication.

Common side effects of all laxative types are:

Some oral stool softeners may cause throat irritation when swallowed. Other side effects may vary based on the active ingredient in each laxative.

Misusing laxatives, such as taking them for extended periods,may causesevere and potentially dangerous symptoms.

Allergic reactions are also possible with all laxatives. Anyone who is having an allergic reaction or is unsure about their reaction should stop using the laxative and contact a healthcare professional.

Importantly, laxatives may interact with other medications a person is taking. People with constipation who take other medications should seek guidance from a healthcare professional or pharmacist before taking any laxatives.

Occasional constipation is natural. Both stool softeners and other laxatives may provide temporary relief from symptoms, and the choice between them may depend on how quickly a person needs relief.

People may experience side effects or complications from taking certain laxatives. Anyone experiencing side effects that last more than a few days should contact a healthcare professional to find out the cause.