Title: Everything you need to know about rheumatoid arthritis
Source: MedicalNewsToday
URL: https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/science-fact-or-fiction-separating-ra-myths-from-facts#1
Collected: 2025-11-15T16:55:35.692446

================================================================================

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune condition that causes inflammation and pain in the joints. It typically affects the hands and feet first, but can impact other body parts.

Symptoms of RA include joint pain, stiffness, and swelling. People can manage RA through medications, therapy, and self-care strategies.

Diagnosis usually involves physical exams, blood tests, and imaging to differentiate RA from other conditions. Early treatment is crucial to help minimize long-term joint and organ damage.

RA usually affects the hands and feet first, but it can occur in any joint. It usually involves the same joints on both sides of the body.

Common symptoms include stiff joints, especially when getting up after sleeping or after sitting down for a while. Some people experience fatigue and a general feeling of being unwell.

The Rheumatoid Arthritis Support Network estimates that RA affects up to1%of the world’s population and over 1.3 million Americans.

The incidence of RAhas increasedglobally over the past decades and will continue to increase in the coming years.

What is rheumatoid arthritis?

RA is anautoimmune disease, which means that a person’simmune systemmistakes the body’s healthy tissues for foreign invaders. It is also a systemic disease that can affect the whole body.

As the immune system responds,inflammationoccurs in the target tissue or organ. Thiscan includethe joints, lungs, eyes, and heart in RA.

Signs and symptoms of RA usually occur in the wrists, hands, or feet andinclude:

pain, swelling, and stiffness in more than one joint

The following images show how RA can present physically:

According to theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), people most often experience the onset of RA in their 60s. Symptoms may start slowly and often worsen gradually with time.

People with RA usually experience periods when their symptoms get worse, known asflares. RA symptoms may flare updue tostress, overactivity, or stopping medications.

Sometimes, a person with RA can go intoremissionif their symptoms go away or are mild. Most people continue to experience flares and remissions throughout their lives.

RA usually affects the same joints on both sides of the body. Pain and stiffnesstend to worsenafter periods of inactivity.

Severe RA can lead to other complications throughout the body and cause joint damage that may lead todisability. Treatment can help manage the severity of symptoms and may reduce the likelihood of experiencing complications.

How does RA affect different parts of the body?

Nobody knows exactly what causes the immune system to malfunction, which leads to RA.

It’s thought to be a combination of genetics and environmental factors.

In RA, the immune system attacks the synovium, the membrane lining of joints. When this happens, the synovial cells proliferate, whichleads tosynovial thickening. Pain and inflammation result.

Eventually, if left untreated, the inflammation can invade and destroy cartilage — the connective tissue that cushions the ends of the bones. The tendons and ligaments that hold the joint together can also weaken and stretch. The joint can eventually lose its shape and configuration, and the damage can be severe.

Learn more aboutgenetic and hereditary RAhere.

Rheumatoid arthritis vs. osteoarthritis

RA is an autoimmune disease that causes inflammation in the joints, leading to pain, stiffness, and swelling. Osteoarthritis leads to many of the same symptoms as RA but isdue tothe typical wear and tear of the joints.

While RA usually affects the same joints on both sides of the body,osteoarthritismay only affect one side.

Although other symptoms can help a person figure out if they are experiencingRA or osteoarthritis, only a doctor can diagnose these conditions.

TheCDCnotes that people with a higher risk of developing RA may include those who:

are 60 years or older

have specific genetic traits

have never given birth

smoke tobacco or whose parents smoked when they were children

Learn more aboutthe risk factors for RAhere.

It may be difficult for a doctor todiagnose RAin its early stages, as itcan resembleother conditions such aslupus (SLE)orpsoriatic arthritis (PsA).

TheCDCrecommends getting a diagnosis within six months of the onset of symptoms so that treatment can begin as soon as possible.

A doctor will look at the person’s clinical signs of inflammation and ask how long the person has experienced them and how severe their symptoms are. They will also perform aphysical examinationto check for swelling, functional limitations, or other unusual presentations.

They also may recommend some tests, including:

Severalblood testscan help diagnose RA and rule out other conditions. Theyinclude:

erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR or sed rate)

C-reactive protein (CRP)

Imaging scans and X-rays

An X-ray orMRIof a jointcan helpa doctor identify what type ofarthritisis present and monitor the progress of a person’s RA over time.

Learn what arthritis looks like on an MRI.

Guidelinesrecommend the following criteria for diagnosing RA:

number and location of affected joints

blood tests indicate the presence of RA

inflammation indicators, or acute phase reactants

If a person has a diagnosis of RA, a doctor may refer them to a specialist known as arheumatologist, who will advise on treatment options.

prevent flares and reduce their severity if they occur

reduce inflammation in the joints

minimize any loss of function caused by pain, joint damage, or deformity

slow down or prevent damage to joints and organs

Options include medications,physical therapy,occupational therapy, counseling, and surgery.

Medications to manage symptoms

Some drugscan helprelieve symptoms and slow the disease’s progression.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)are available from pharmacies over the counter (OTC). Examples include Motrin,Advil, and Aleve.

Long-term use and high doses can lead to side effects,including:

kidney and liver problems

Corticosteroidsreduce pain and inflammation and may help slow joint damage, but they cannot cure RA.

If NSAIDs do not work, a doctor may inject a steroid into the joint. Relief is usually rapid, but the effect is variable. It can last a few weeks or months, depending on the severity of the symptoms.

This can help with acute symptoms or short-term flare-ups. However, a doctor will limitsteroid injectionsto no more thanthree times per yearbecause of their impact on the soft tissue structures around the joints. More frequent injections can potentially damage these structures or cause them to tear off from where they attach to bone.

Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)

DMARDsaffect how the immune system works. They can slow the progression of RA and prevent permanent damage to joints and other tissues by interfering with an overactive immune system. A person usually takes DMARDs for life.

These types of medications are most effective if a person uses them in the early stages of RA, but it can take several weeks to a couple of months to fully experience their benefits. Some people may have to try different types of DMARDs before finding the most suitable one.

Side effects caninclude:

immune-related disorders

an increased risk ofinfections

abnormal blood counts

Biologic treatments, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) inhibitors, also change how the immune system works. When the human body faces an infection or other threat, it producesTNF-alpha, an inflammatory substance. TNF-alpha inhibitors suppress this substance and help prevent inflammation.

TNF-alpha inhibitors can reduce pain, morning stiffness, and swollen or tender joints. People usually notice an improvement two weeks after starting treatment.

certolizumab pegol (Cimzia)

infliximab (Remicade)

Possible side effectsinclude:

a higher risk of infection

congestive heart failure

demyelinating diseases

Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitorsare a newer subtype of DMARD medications. Theseinclude:

tofacitinib (Xeljanz)

baricitinib (Olumiant)

upadacitinib (Rinvoq)

While traditional DMARDs stop the immune system from producing immune cells that cause RA to develop, JAK inhibitors target specific signaling molecules. This helps prevent the cellular process that causes RA to progress.

For the20–30%of people living with rheumatoid arthritis who do not respond to traditional DMARDs or biologics, JAK inhibitors have proven to be an effective option.

Occupational or physical therapy

An occupational therapistcan helpa person learn new and effective ways of carrying out daily tasks. This can minimize stress on painful joints. For example, a person with painful fingers might learn to use a specially devised gripping and grabbing tool.

A physical therapist can advise people about using assistive devices, such as a cane, and help individuals develop a suitable exercise plan.

Which exercises can help people with RA?

In some cases, a doctormayrecommendsurgery to:

repair damaged joints

The following procedures are possible:

arthroscopic surgery, a procedure to remove inflamed joint tissue

surgery to release tendons responsible for unusual bending in the fingers

carpal tunnel releaseto relieve nerve compression in the hand and wrist

arthroplasty, a total joint replacement surgery

Learn why RA affects the hand joints.

Finding time to practice self-care can help a person cope with the day-to-day challenges that RA brings. Several strategies that may help a person manage their conditioninclude.

getting plenty of rest, especially during an RA flare

low impact exercises, such asswimming, boost overall health and mobility

managing weight, which can prevent additional stress on joints

eating abalanced diet, such as aMediterranean diet, whichfocuseson inflammation-fighting foods

applyingheat or coldpacks

meditation, guided imagery,deep breathing, or muscle relaxation to relieve stress

trying othernatural remediesand complementary therapies, such asacupunctureandSwedish massage, to relieve pain

Frequently asked questions

What are the stages of rheumatoid arthritis?

RAgenerally developsin four stages:

Stage 1:An X-ray will not show any bone or joint destruction.

Stage 2:An X-ray will show the impact on the bone.

Stage 3:An X-ray will show a particular kind of erosion of the cartilage and bone that a doctor can recognize as resulting from RA and deformities in the affected joints.

Stage 4:The person will experience ankylosis, which is when a joint becomes stiff and fuses with the bone.

Learn more aboutthe four stages of RAhere.

Is rheumatoid arthritis hereditary?

Researchhas determined that there are genes that make developing RA more likely.

One theory is that bacteria or viruses trigger RA in people who have these genes. One of the genes thatmay beresponsible is HLA-DR4, and it is common in people of European ancestry.

However, this may not fully explain why some people get RA and others do not. There are likely environmental triggers also.

Can a person prevent rheumatoid arthritis?

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) cannot be completely prevented, as its exact cause is not fully understood and involves a combination of genetic, environmental, and possibly hormonal factors.

However, a person canreduce their riskand potentially delay the onset of RA by taking several steps that include but are not limited to:

reducing exposure to inhaled silica, dust, and occupational risks

maintaining a healthy weight

increasing leisure time physical activity

Learn more aboutsmoking and RAhere.

What is the life expectancy of a person with rheumatoid arthritis?

According to a 2015 study, people with RA might have a54% higherrisk of mortality compared with people who do not have the condition.

RA patients often face additional chronic medical conditions and complications, severely impacting their health outcomes.

Notably, there is a strong association between RA and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease,leading toacceleratedcoronary artery disease.

However, it is difficult to predict a person’s life expectancy as the course of the disease differs significantly among individuals.

With the right treatment, many people can live past the age of80 or even 90 yearswhile experiencing relatively mild symptoms and only minor limitations in day-to-day life.

Rheumatoid arthritis is a painful chronic autoimmune condition that can cause joint damage and make it difficult for a person to carry out their daily tasks. It can affect joints but can also lead to inflammation throughout the body.

Anyone who experiences pain and swelling in two or more joints not caused by trauma should see a doctor, as early treatment can reduce the risk of long-term problems.