Title: Welcome to our content hubs
Source: MedicalNewsToday
URL: https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/content-hubs
Collected: 2025-11-15T16:55:28.940399

================================================================================

AtMedical News Today, we believe that knowledge is empowerment. For that reason, we have created content hubs to provide our readers with the latest news and science-backed resources on a wealth of health topics and medical conditions.

Explore our hubs below, and join us on the journey to a deeper understanding of health.

Estimates suggest that in the United States, around7 millionchildren and teenagers aged 3⁠-17 years have been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Visit our hub for in-depth resources on ADHD, including information on the signs, symptoms, causes, risk factors, diagnosis, management and treatment of the condition.

Learn more about ADHD here.

Approximately40 million adultsin the United States have an anxiety disorder, which makes it one of the most common mental health conditions in the country. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on anxiety, including information on the signs and symptoms, causes, management, and treatment.

Learn more about anxiety here.

Arthritis is a condition that causes inflammation of the joints, leading to pain, swelling, and stiffness. More than 54 million people in the United States have some form of the condition. Visit our hub for evidence-backed information on the symptoms, management, and treatment of arthritis, including osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and psoriatic arthritis.

Learn more about arthritis here.

In the United States, about 25 million people have asthma, and more than 50 million experience some form of allergy each year. Visit our hub to discover science-backed resources on the management and treatment of asthma, seasonal allergies, food allergies, pet allergies, and more.

Learn more about asthma & allergies here.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of conditions characterized by difficulties with behavior and communication, as well as social challenges. Estimates suggest that1 in 36 childrenin the United States live with ASD. Visit our hub to find in-depth resources on ASD, including information on types of ASD, signs and symptoms, living with ASD, and more.

Learn more about autism here.

Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition characterized by extreme changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These changes can cause severe disruption to a person’s day-to-day life. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on bipolar disorder, including information on the types of bipolar disorder, signs and symptoms, risk factors, management, treatment and more.

Learn more about bipolar disorder here.

Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women in the United States. About 1 in 8 women will develop the condition in their lifetime. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on breast cancer, including information on the risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, stages, treatment, and more.

Learn more about breast cancer here.

Cancer is a disease that develops when cells in the body divide and grow uncontrollably. It affects about 1 in 3 people in the United States. Our hub provides the latest news in cancer research, along with science-backed resources on the types, symptoms, diagnosis, stages, management, and treatment of cancer.

Learn more about cancer here.

Cardiovascular health

Cardiovascular health refers to the well-being of the circulatory system, which supplies the body with blood. This hub provides science-backed resources on heart disease, blood pressure, stroke, heart attack, diet and fitness for heart health, and more.

Learn more about cardiovascular health here.

Cannabidiol (CBD) is a chemical compound and active ingredient present in theCannabis sativaplant. We explore the science behind CBD and CBD products and explain how they may help with chronic pain, anxiety, depression, and other conditions.

Learn more about CBD here.

About 93 million U.S. adults have high cholesterol, which can raise a person’s risk of heart disease and stroke. Visit our hub to learn more about the causes of high cholesterol, how to understand the different types and healthy ranges of cholesterol, and how to lower or raise its levels using diet, medical treatment, and more.

Learn more about cholesterol here.

More than 16.4 million people in the United States have received a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, many more people may be living with the condition without realizing it. Visit our hub for resources on COPD, including information on the types, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, complications, treatment, and more.

Learn more about COPD here.

The coronavirus pandemic has affected the entire world. Visit our hub to learn more about COVID-19, including the symptoms and science, how you can protect yourself and your family, and the latest news and advice from our experts.

Learn more about COVID-19 here.

Each year, there are more than 10 million new cases of dementia worldwide. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form, contributing to about 60–70% of cases. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on Alzheimer’s disease and other types of dementia, including information on signs and symptoms, management, and care.

Learn more about alzheimer’s & dementia here.

Estimates suggest that about280 million peopleworldwide are living with depression. Visit our hub for in-depth resources on depression, including information on the types, signs and symptoms, management, treatment, and more.

Learn more about depression here.

The skin is the body’s largest organ, containing more than 650 sweat glands and more than 1,000 nerve endings. The skin provides protection from the environment and helps regulate body temperature, so it is essential to keep it healthy. Visit our hub for in-depth resources on dermatology and skin care, including information on eczema, psoriasis, acne, sunburn, skin pigmentation, and more.

Learn more about dermatology here.

Diabetes is a condition that impairs the body’s ability to process blood glucose, causing blood sugar to become too high. This hub offers in-depth resources for people with type 1, type 2, or gestational diabetes. We explore the science behind diabetes, diabetes management, diet, and more.

Learn more about diabetes here.

Just one blood donation can help to save up to three lives. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on blood donation eligibility, the importance of donating blood, blood types, blood transfusion, blood donation aftercare, and more.

Learn more about donating blood here.

Eczema is a condition that can cause itchy, cracked, inflamed skin. According to estimates, around31.6 millionpeople in the United States are living with some form of eczema. Visit our hub for resources on eczema, including information on atopic dermatitis and other forms of the skin condition, as well as resources on management and treatment.

Learn more about eczema here.

Endometriosis is a condition in which tissue similar to the lining of the uterus grows on other areas, such as the ovaries. It is estimated to affect more than 6 million women in the United States. Visit our hub for evidence-backed resources on endometriosis, including information on symptoms, diagnosis, complications, management, treatment, and more.

Learn more about endometriosis here.

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), up to 24% of all deaths across the globe can be linked to environmental factors that are within our control. Visit our environment and sustainability hub for information on the global health impact of climate change, pollution, food sources, economic factors, and more, plus resources for sustainable products.

Learn more about environment& health here.

About 50 million people across the globe are living with epilepsy, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Estimates suggest that more than 70% of these individuals could be free of seizures through effective diagnosis and treatment. Visit our hub for in-depth resources on epilepsy and other seizure disorders, including information on the types and symptoms, the management and treatment of seizures, and more.

Learn more about epilepsy & seizures here.

Exercise is key for maintaining mental and physical health. Our hub contains science-backed resources on exercise and fitness, including information on exercise types, home exercise, weight management, fitness products, and more.

Learn more about exercise & fitness here.

Eye health refers to a person’s healthy vision. Receiving a diagnosis for any eye symptoms can help detect eye conditions early. This hub provides resources on the causes of common eye problems, symptoms, the link between eyes and other health conditions, eye health in children, remedies, treatments, and products for common eye issues.

Learn more about eye health here.

Influenza, or flu, is a contagious respiratory illness resulting from viral infection. It can cause mild-to-severe illness. This hub provides evidence-based resources to help keep you and your loved ones healthy during the flu season. Learn about flu prevention, flu symptoms, flu treatments, and more.

Learn more about flu here.

More than half of adults across the globe have experienced some form of headache disorder over the past year. Of these, more than 30% have experienced migraine. This hub provides evidence-backed resources on the prevention, causes, management, and treatment of migraine, cluster headaches, tension headaches, and more.

Learn more about headache & migraine here.

Ensuring equal access to healthcare means making sure that everyone has a fair chance to be as healthy as possible. This hub examines the realities of health disparities in relation to race, societal status, documentation status, sexual orientation, and gender. It also considers how we can continue to move toward equal access and treatment.

Learn more about health equity here.

Health products & services

In-depth resources and reviews for health products and services, including information on nutrition, exercise, fitness, and sleep products, and more.

Learn more about health products & services here.

As people are living longer lives, staying healthy with age is becoming increasingly important. Our hub provides evidence-backed information and resources to help you live your healthiest life. Learn more about the process of getting older, including brain aging, the best exercises for later life, and more.

Learn more about healthy aging here.

HIV is a virus that alters the immune system and makes a person more susceptible to infections. Without treatment, HIV may progress to an advanced stage called AIDS. We dispel the myths surrounding HIV and AIDS and provide research-backed information about what life is like for those living with this virus.

Learn more about HIV & AIDS here.

The human body comprises cells, tissues, organs, and a total of10 major systemsthat work together to perform specific functions that are crucial for everyday living. Visit our hub to learn more about the workings of different parts of the body, including the nervous system, the cardiovascular system, the digestive system, the immune system, and more.

Learn more about human biology here.

High blood pressure affects almost half of adults in the United States. Hypertension can increase the risk of heart disease, stroke, and other cardiovascular conditions. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on high blood pressure, including information on the types of hypertension, causes, symptoms, management, treatment, and more.

Learn more about hypertension here.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)

Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are both forms of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Visit our hub for science-backed resources on both conditions, including information on the symptoms, diagnosis, treatment options, and management techniques.

Learn more about Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) here.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a condition that affects the digestive system, causing symptoms such as bloating, abdominal pain, and changes in bowel habits. Estimates suggest that IBS affects around10-15%of people in the United States. Visit our hub for evidence-backed resources on IBS, including information on the causes and risk factors, signs and symptoms, management, treatment, and more.

Learn more about irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) here.

Leukemia is a form of cancer that affects the blood or the bone marrow. Estimates suggest that in 2022, more than60,000 peoplein the United States will receive a leukemia diagnosis. Visit our hub for in-depth resources on leukemia, including information on the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of ALL, AML, CLL, CML, and other types of blood cancer.

Learn more about leukemia here.

This hub focuses on providing a positive and supportive space for you to learn more about health topics that affect those in LGBTQIA+ communities. Visit our hub for resources on gender identity, sexual orientation, mental health, sexual health, and gender-affirming care for LGBTQIA+ communities and allies.

Learn more about LGBTQIA+ here.

Lung cancer is the second most common cancer among both men and women in the United States. Non-small cell lung cancer accounts for about 80–85% of lung cancer cases. Visit our hub for evidence-backed resources on lung cancer, including information on the risk factors, signs and symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and more.

Learn more about lung cancer here.

Medicare is a government program that aims to provide medical and other health-related services to specific individuals in the United States. This hub offers resources to help guide you through the complex world of Medicare. Learn about how Medicare works, including eligibility, costs, coverage, and more.

Learn more about Medicare here.

Menopause is when a person’s menstrual cycle stops permanently as a result of reduced hormone production. Estimates show that theaverage age of menopause onsetin the United States is 52. Visit our hub for In-depth resources on menopause and perimenopause, including information on the signs and symptoms, management strategies, and more.

Learn more about menopause here.

The term men’s health refers to physical and mental health conditions that may be more prevalent among men. This hub provides research-backed information to help with living a healthy life. Explore mental health, sexual health, cardiovascular health, and more.

Learn more about men’s health here.

Mental and emotional well-being are just as important as physical health. Our hub provides a range of resources to help support your mental health and well-being. Visit this hub for information on anxiety, stress, depression, therapy, and more.

Learn more about mental health here.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic condition that affects the central nervous system. Visit our hub to find resources for people living with MS, including information on the signs, symptoms, and stages of MS, how to manage exacerbations, and more.

Learn more about multiple sclerosis here.

This hub guides you through the complex world of nutrition, which is the study of how the body processes nutrients and what role the diet plays in maintaining health. We look at healthy eating, weight management, food allergies, the science of nutrition, and more.

Learn more about nutrition here.

Estimates suggest that about1.1 percentof women in the United States will receive a diagnosis of ovarian cancer in their lifetime. Visit our hub for in-depth resources on ovarian cancer, including information on the signs and symptoms, diagnosis, stages, treatment, and more.

Learn more about ovarian cancer here.

Parkinson’s disease is a degenerative neurological disorder that affects movement and coordination. This hub provides evidence-backed resources for people living with Parkinson’s disease, including information on risk factors, diagnosis, stages, treatments, and more.

Learn more about Parkinson’s disease here.

Pregnancy & parenthood

Pregnancy and early parenthood can bring a myriad of both physical and emotional changes, so it is essential to look after your health and well-being. Visit our hub for in-depth resources on pregnancy and parenthood, including information on testing, diet, exercise, and complications during pregnancy, postpartum health, and more.

Learn more about pregnancy & parenthood here.

Prostate cancer occurs when cells within the prostate gland — a walnut-sized organ that sits below the bladder — grow uncontrollably. Health experts estimate that around1 in 8 menin the United States will receive a diagnosis of prostate cancer at some point in their lives. Visit our hub for evidence-backed resources on prostate cancer, including information on the signs and symptoms, causes, screening and diagnosis, treatment, and more.

Learn more about prostate cancer here.

More than 8 million people in the United States are living with psoriasis. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on this skin condition, including information on types, how to identify it, causes and triggers, treatments, living with psoriasis, and more.

Learn more about psoriasis here.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease that arises when the immune system mistakingly attacks healthy cells in the body. It primarily affects the joints of the hands, knees, and wrists, causing pain and inflammation. Visit our hub for science-backed resources on RA, including information on symptoms, management, treatment, diagnosis, causes, and more.

Learn more about rheumatoid arthritis here.

Sleep is crucial in the maintenance of physical, mental, and emotional well-being. This hub provides resources that look at the science of sleep and dreams, offer information on sleep disorders, and explain how to form healthy sleep habits.

Learn more about the science of sleep here.

Sexual health focuses on the physical and emotional well-being of a person in relation to their sexuality, sexual relationships, and sexual experiences. This hub focuses on providing a positive and respectful space for you to learn more about male, female, and LGBTQIA+ sexual health, mental health, sexual practices, birth control, associated risks, and more.

Learn more about sexual health here.

It is estimated that around1 in 5people in the United States will develop skin cancer in their lifetime, making it the most common form of cancer in the country. Visit our hub for in-depth resources on melanoma and other forms of skin cancer, including information on the signs of skin cancer, types, risk factors, treatment, and more.

Learn more about skin cancer here.

Veganism & vegetarianism

An increasing number of people worldwide are choosing to limit or exclude animal products from their diets due to health, environmental, or animal welfare reasons. Visit our dedicated hub for the latest news and resources on vegan, vegetarian, and plant-based diets, including information on essential nutrients, animal product substitutes, diet myths, and more.

Learn more about veganism & vegetarianism here.

Vitamins, minerals & supplements

Visit this hub for in-depth resources on the key nutrients that support our bodies in functioning properly. Explore vitamin deficiency and how to prevent it and learn about the best dietary supplements and the myths surrounding them.

Learn more about vitamins, minerals & supplements here.

Obesity can increase the risk of many health complicatons, including type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. Visit our hub for resources on weight management, including information on BMI, weight-related health complications, weight loss, weight gain, and more.

Learn more about weight management here.

This hub focuses on physical and mental health conditions that women are more likely to experience. It includes in-depth, science-backed resources covering all aspects of women’s health, including stress, mental health, sexual health, reproductive health, menstruation and menopause, fertility, diet, exercise, and more.

Learn more about women’s health here.