Title: How to Prevent High Blood Pressure
Source: MedlinePlus
URL: https://medlineplus.gov/howtopreventhighbloodpressure.html
Collected: 2025-11-15T16:26:04.420629

================================================================================

How to Prevent High Blood Pressure

Prevention and Risk Factors

Around half of American adults havehigh blood pressure(hypertension). Many of those people don't know they have it because there are usually no warning signs. This can be dangerous, because high blood pressure can lead to life-threatening conditions likeheart attackorstroke. The good news is that you can often prevent or treat high blood pressure. Early diagnosis and heart-healthy lifestyle changes can keep high blood pressure from seriously damaging your health.

What is blood pressure?

Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into your arteries (the blood vessels that carry blood from your heart to the tissues and organs in your body). Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Blood pressure is measured as two numbers:

Systolic pressure(the first and higher number) measures pressure inside your arteries when your heart beats

Diastolic pressure(the second and lower number) measures the pressure inside your arteries when your heart rests between beats

As an example, a blood pressure reading of 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80.

How is high blood pressure diagnosed?

High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regularblood pressure checksfrom your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. They will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis:

For children and teens, the provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and sex.

Who is more likely to develop high blood pressure?

Anyone can develop high blood pressure, but there are certain factors that can increase your risk:

Age.Blood pressure tends to rise with age.

Race/Ethnicity. High blood pressure is more common in Black adults. They also tend to have higher average blood pressure numbers and get high blood pressure earlier in life.

Sex.Men are more likely than women to develop high blood pressure throughout middle age. But in older adults, women are more likely than men to develop high blood pressure.

Lifestyle.Certain lifestyle habits can raise your risk for high blood pressure, such as eating too muchsodium(salt) or not enoughpotassium,lack of exercise, drinking too muchalcohol, andsmoking.

Family history andgenetics.High blood pressure often runs in families. Many genes are linked to small increases in high blood pressure risk.

Social and economic factors:Research shows that factors such as income, education level, where you live, and the type of job you have may raise your risk of high blood pressure. For example, working early or late shifts can raise your risk.Experiencing discrimination and poverty has been linked to high blood pressure. Also, some research has shown that trauma in childhood may raise the risk of high blood pressure.

Research shows that factors such as income, education level, where you live, and the type of job you have may raise your risk of high blood pressure. For example, working early or late shifts can raise your risk.

Experiencing discrimination and poverty has been linked to high blood pressure. Also, some research has shown that trauma in childhood may raise the risk of high blood pressure.

Certain medicines.Some medicines can raise your blood pressure, including:CertainantidepressantsDecongestants (medicines to relieve a stuffy nose)Hormonalbirth control pillsNon-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which are a type ofpain reliever

Certainantidepressants

Decongestants (medicines to relieve a stuffy nose)

Hormonalbirth control pills

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which are a type ofpain reliever

Having certain other medical conditions,such as:Some tumorsChronic kidney diseaseDiabetesMetabolic syndromeOverweight andobesitySleep apneaThyroid problems

Chronic kidney disease

Overweight andobesity

How can I prevent high blood pressure?

You can help prevent high blood pressure by having a healthy lifestyle. This means:

Eating a healthy diet.To help manage your blood pressure, you should limit the amount ofsodium(salt) that you eat and increase the amount ofpotassiumin your diet. It is also important to eat foods that are lower in fat, as well as plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. TheDASH eating planis an example of an eating plan that can help you to lower your blood pressure.

Getting regular physical activity.Regular physical activity can help you maintain a healthy weight and lower your blood pressure.

Being at a healthy weight.Being overweight or having obesity increases your risk for high blood pressure. Maintaining a healthy weight can help you control high blood pressure and reduce your risk for other health problems.

Limiting alcohol.Drinking too much alcohol can raise your blood pressure. It also adds extra calories, which may cause weight gain.

Not smoking.Cigarette smoking raises your blood pressure and puts you at higher risk for heart attack and stroke. If you do not smoke, don't start. If you do smoke, talk to yourprovider for help in finding the best way for you toquit.

Managingstress.Learning how to relax and manage stress can improve your emotional and physical health and lower high blood pressure. Stress management techniques include exercising, listening to music, focusing on something calm or peaceful, and meditating.

Getting enough high-quality sleep.

If you already have high blood pressure, it is important to prevent it from getting worse or causing complications. You need to get regular medical care and follow your treatment plan. Your plan will include healthy lifestyle habit recommendations and possiblymedicines.

NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Preventing High Blood Pressure(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Prevention and Risk Factors

Community Health Worker Multicultural Resources(National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute)-PDF

Mind Your Risks(National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke)

Alcohol: Does It Affect Blood Pressure?(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Anxiety: A Cause of High Blood Pressure?(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Blood Pressure: Is It Affected by Cold Weather?(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Caffeine: How Does It Affect Blood Pressure?(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Elevated Blood Pressure(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Get the Most Out of Home Blood Pressure Monitoring(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Measuring Blood Pressure(National Library of Medicine)Also inSpanish

Sleep Deprivation: A Cause of High Blood Pressure?(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

10 Ways to Control High Blood Pressure without Medication(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Can Whole-Grain Foods Lower Blood Pressure?(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

Common High Blood Pressure Myths(American Heart Association)

DASH Diet: MedlinePlus Health Topic(National Library of Medicine)Also inSpanish

Exercise: A Drug-Free Approach to Lowering High Blood Pressure(Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)Also inSpanish

How Potassium Can Help Prevent or Treat High Blood Pressure(American Heart Association)

Managing Stress to Control High Blood Pressure(American Heart Association)

Shaking the Salt Habit to Lower High Blood Pressure(American Heart Association)

Tips to Reduce Salt and Sodium(National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute)-PDF

Hypertension: MedlinePlus Genetics(National Library of Medicine)

Blood pressure(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish

Blood Pressure and Lifestyle Quiz(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish

What Do You Know About Low Sodium Diets?(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish

ClinicalTrials.gov: Lifestyle Changes for High Blood Pressure(National Institutes of Health)

Journal ArticlesReferences and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine)

Article: Polyphenolic Compounds in the Prevention and Treatment of Hypertension: A Review.

Article: Individual flavonoids intake and its association with hypertension in US adults:...

Article: Mobile health education for salt reduction and hypertension prevention: effects on...

How to Prevent High Blood Pressure -- see more articles

American Heart Association

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

How Women Ages 15-44 Can Take Simple and Inexpensive Steps to Reduce Blood Pressure(Department of Health and Human Services, Office on Women's Health)

Controlling your high blood pressure(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish

DASH diet to lower high blood pressure(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish

Healthy Blood Pressure for Healthy Hearts: Tracking Your Numbers(National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute)-PDFAlso inSpanish

Low-salt diet(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish

Stress and your heart(Medical Encyclopedia)Also inSpanish

Controlling your high blood pressure

DASH diet to lower high blood pressure

High blood pressure and diet

Stress and your heart

Related Health Topics

Blood Pressure Medicines

High Blood Pressure in Pregnancy

National Institutes of Health