Title: What Is Type 1 Diabetes?
Source: Healthline
URL: https://www.healthline.com/health/type-1-diabetes
Collected: 2025-11-15T16:19:10.445273

================================================================================

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune condition where the body cannot produce insulin, requiring individuals to manage blood sugar levels through insulin injections and lifestyle adjustments.

Common symptoms of type 1 diabetes include excessive thirst, frequent urination, blurred vision, and fatigue, which can sometimes be mistaken for other conditions or stress.

Managing type 1 diabetes involves constant monitoring of blood sugar levels, balanced eating, regular exercise, and awareness of factors like mental health and medications to prevent long-term complications.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune condition that means people cannot make insulin in their bodies naturally. As a result, they can’t regulate blood sugar levels as well as those without the condition.

This means they must inject insulin to keep their blood sugar levels in target range and manage other aspects of life, including diet, exercise, sleep, and mental health.

People with T1D may develop complications over time, which can lead to other challenges in managing this condition and life in general.

Most common symptoms of type 1 diabetes

The following arecommon T1D symptoms:

dramatic weight loss in a short period of time

Thesymptoms of type 1 diabetesmay not always be clear, especially for parents who may not immediately recognize these symptoms in their children. T1D can resemble the flu, and they can misunderstand it as a typical effect related to busy school or sports activities.

With adults, they can mistake T1D for the same effects from everyday stress, work, and life situations.

But T1D can develop suddenly and become life threatening in a short amount of time, becoming a medical emergency that might lead to coma or worse.

You can watch for thesecommon symptomsas warning signs for type 1 diabetes. You may need to seek emergency medical care.

Why does T1D develop?

Researchers don’t know the exact cause of type 1 diabetes.

What they know is that T1D involves anautoimmune reaction, in which the body attacks and kills the insulin-making cells in the pancreas for some reason.

Geneticsplays a rolein that process.

T1D may be passed down through generations of a family, though it’s unclear how the pattern works and why some people in a family will develop diabetes while others will not.

Researchers have identified certain gene variants that may increase a person’s risk. A parent and child may share these variants between them, generation after generation. However, not everyone who has these genes develops the condition.

For example, identical twins with the same genes may or may not develop the condition. If one twin has T1D, the other twin develops the conditionhalf the timeor less. This suggests that genes aren’t the only factor.

Researchers also believe there may be environmental causes that play a part in this T1D development. This might include traumatic experiences, including the flu or other viruses and illnesses (including COVID-19), which appear to tip the scales over that line toward T1D development.

Whatever the reasons, this leads to the body not being able to make insulin itself.

Insulinis a hormone that helps your body’s cells use glucose (sugar) for energy. Your body gets glucose from the food you eat. Insulin allows glucose to pass from your blood into your body’s cells.

When the cells have enough, your liver and muscle tissues store the extraglucosein the form of glycogen. It’s broken down into blood sugar and released when you need energy between meals, during exercise, or while you sleep.

With T1D, your body is unable to process glucose due to the lack of insulin.

Glucose from your food can’t make its way into your cells. This leaves too much glucose circulating in your blood. High blood sugar levels can lead to both short- and long-term complications.

Diagnosis of type 1 diabetes

Healthcare professionals usually diagnose through a series of tests. Some may be quick in a doctor’s office, while others may require bloodwork at a separate lab or even hours of preparation or monitoring in a hospital.

A healthcare professional candiagnose T1Dif:

fasting blood sugar is greater than 126 mg/dL on two separate tests

random blood sugar is greater than 200 mg/dL, along with symptoms of diabetes

hemoglobin A1Cis greater than 6.5% on two separate tests

When blood sugar gets so high thatdiabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)occurs, a person can become very ill. This is often the reason people end up in the hospital or their doctor’s office and they receive a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes.

If you have any of the symptoms of diabetes, your doctor will likely order tests.

Doctors also use the same criteria to diagnose type 2 diabetes. People with type 1 diabetes sometimes receive amisdiagnosisas having type 2 diabetes. This may be more common in adults, who could have T1D that sometimes develops more gradually.

A doctor may not realize that you’ve received a misdiagnosis until you begin developing complications or worsening symptoms despite treatment.

How is T1D different from other diabetes types?

Type 1 diabetes is not the same as type 2 diabetes or other types, though they can mirror each other in many ways — from the symptoms to insulin treatment and daily blood sugar checks to certain diabetes complications that may develop over time.

There are a handful of diabetes types, but the main types are type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

Here are some of the key differences between T1D and T2D, in particular:

Experts historically viewed T1D as “juvenile diabetes” because it most often affected children. It is an outdated term and doesn’t reflect the reality that T1D can occur at any age. Just because someone is an adult displaying diabetes symptoms does not mean they have T2D.

For people withtype 2 diabetes, their body stops responding and using insulin as well as it should to move glucose from the blood into the cells despite having adequate levels of the hormone. Eventually, their bodies may stop making adequate insulin entirely.

Type 1 diabetes develops very quickly, and symptoms are obvious. For people with type 2 diabetes, the condition can develop over many years. A person with type 2 diabetes may not know they have it until they have a complication.

Another type of diabetes calledLatent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults (LADA)is sometimes referred to as type 1.5 diabetes. People may receive a misdiagnosis of type 1 diabetes instead of LADA, which may develop more gradually.

A qualified medical professional can help correctly diagnose the type of diabetes, along with your input if you feel that you may be experiencing T1D or LADA.

How do you treat type 1 diabetes?

If you receive a T1D diagnosis, your body can’t make its own insulin. You’ll need to take insulin to help your body use the sugar in your blood.

This may mean taking insulin through injections with a syringe and glass vial, a prefilled plasticinsulin pen, or using a fast-actinginhaled insulin called Afrezza.

Some people may also choose to use a device known as an insulin pump, which attaches to your body and delivers insulin more constantly throughout the day and night through a small cannula inserted through the top layer of skin.

Some people find using aninsulin pumpmore convenient than sticking themselves with a needle, and this device may also provide more flexibility and the ability to adjust insulin doses at different times to balance out blood sugar levels.

Affording insulin and diabetes supplies

Insulin itselfcan be expensive, no matter how you choose to administer it.

The same applies to insulin pens, pumps, and other diabetes supplies needed to take insulin and manage your condition.

People with insurance may check their healthcare coverage and plans, including Medicare and Medicaid, to determine what types of insulin are best covered and how much they may cost.

The amount of insulin someone with T1D needs varies throughout the day and night.

Managing blood sugars and tracking how much different foods and drinks affect your blood sugar levels, along with exercise and other factors, can help you and your diabetes care team determine how much insulin you may need.

Several types ofinsulinexist. Your doctor may have you try more than one to find what works best for you.

Managing type 1 diabetes

Diabetes managementhas many parts, beyond just taking insulin.

This condition means constant management of blood sugar levels, which can rise or fall as a result of many factors. Just some of those reasons can include:

eating patterns and carbohydrate amounts

mental health and stress levels

other non-diabetes conditions (comorbidities)

different medications for diabetes and other health reasons

Type 1 diabetes can lead to low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) and high blood sugar levels (hyperglycemia). People can manage both, but these can also become more severe and require immediate treatment.

Hypoglycemia occurs when blood sugar is too low, usually when the body has too much insulin. It can happen if you wait too long to eat or have a snack, or if you exercise too much.

Some of the most common low blood sugarsymptomsmay include:

inability to focus or think clearly

shivers no matter the temperature

unexplained and sudden mood changes

loss of consciousness

High blood sugar levels

Conversely,hyperglycemiais high blood sugar. Depending on the level of hyperglycemia, it can cause you to feel sluggish, unfocused, or even sick.

If blood sugars get too high and you don’t have enough insulin in the system, this can lead to potentially dangerous DKA.Symptomsmay include:

vomiting or stomach pain

Pregnancy and type 1 diabetes

Pregnancy presents unique challenges for people who have type 1 diabetes. However, it’s possible to have a healthy pregnancy and baby despite having this condition.

The most important thing to remember if you are expecting or trying to become pregnant and have type 1 diabetes is that everything you do for yourself, you do for your baby. People who have high blood sugar levels have babies with high blood sugar.

According to theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), high blood sugar levels during pregnancy can lead to complications such as:

complicated cesarean delivery, commonly referred to as aC-section

If you have type 1 diabetes and want to become pregnant or find out that you’re pregnant, talk with your doctor immediately. They can discuss any changes you may need to make to guarantee your blood sugar levels remain stable and safe for you and your baby.

It’s best to plan ahead for pregnancy and discuss your diabetes and blood sugar goals with your doctor.

During your pregnancy, you will likely need to see a healthcare professional more frequently. You may also need to adjust medication and insulin throughout the pregnancy.

Can you drink alcohol with T1D?

Yes, you can drink alcohol if you live with type 1 diabetes.

However, it’s important to know that alcohol canaffect your blood sugar levels in a big wayin the short term. Over time, excessive alcohol use can contribute to diabetes complications.

The liver processes and removes alcohol from the body. The liver also helps manage blood sugar levels. If you have T1D and drink alcohol, your liver slows down how it manages blood sugar in order to address the alcohol in your system.

This can lead to low blood sugar immediately and for several hours after drinking. It’s important to test your blood sugar before drinking alcohol and to continue to monitor it afterward.

What are type 1 diabetes complications?

Over time, high blood sugar levels can cause damage to various parts of the body. Symptoms can include:

increased heart attack risk

eye problems, including blindness

infections on the skin, especially the feet, that could require amputation in serious cases

Diabetes can also damage your nerves and lead to a condition calleddiabetic neuropathy. This is common in the feet.

Small cuts, especially on the bottom of your feet, can quickly turn into severe ulcers and infections, especially if blood sugar levels aren’t controlled. This is because you can’t feel or see the cuts, so you don’t treat them.

That is why it’s important to check your feet regularly if you have diabetes. If you happen to notice any foot injuries, let your doctor know right away.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune condition in which a person’s body is unable to process glucose due to a lack of insulin. Experts believe it is influenced by genetics, environmental factors, and possibly by viral infections.

This condition requires insulin and daily blood sugar management, including balanced eating and an exercise routine. When monitoring blood sugars and overall management, you may also want to consider your mental health, sleeping patterns, and medications.

You can lower your risk of long-term diabetes complications by keeping blood sugars and A1C levels in the target range. It’s important to consult with your doctor and healthcare team on managing diabetes and glucose levels regularly.

Read this article in Spanish.