Title: 18 best foods for high blood pressure
Source: MedicalNewsToday
URL: https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322284
Collected: 2025-11-15T16:55:08.510532

================================================================================

Research has shown that certain foods — such as fruits, vegetables, nuts, and oily fish — can help lower blood pressure. Combining these foods in the diet may lead to long-term health benefits.

Medications, dietary changes, and other lifestyle modifications can reducehigh blood pressure, or hypertension, while lowering the likelihood of developing associated conditions. High blood pressure increases a person’s risk ofheart disease,stroke, and kidney disease.

Types of food that may help include:

fruits, such as kiwi and oranges

vegetables, for instance, green leafy vegetables and beets

nuts, for example, pistachios and walnuts

oily fish, such as mackerel

spices, such as cinnamon

This article discusses foods that can help reduce high blood pressure and provide scientific evidence.

A note about sex and gender

Sex and gender exist on spectrums. This article will use the terms “male,” “female,” or both to refer to sex assigned at birth.Learn more.

18 foods that help lower blood pressure

Certain foods and overall dietcan helppeople manage blood pressure.

In general, theUnited States Department of Agriculture (USDA)considers a serving to be:

1 cup of cooked or raw vegetables or fruit

1 cup of 100% fruit juice

2 cups of raw leafy salad greens

half a cup of dried fruit

For most ages, the USDA recommends consuming around 2 cups of fruit and 3 cups of vegetables daily, although this varies slightly according to age and sex.

Blueberriesandstrawberriescontainantioxidantcompounds called anthocyanins, a type of flavonoid.

A2019 reviewsuggests consistent findings to support the theory that anthocyanins and anthocyanin-rich berries can lower blood pressure.

However, they emphasize that this outcome is not generalized and may depend on several factors, including study length, baseline characteristics, and dosage.

The review’s authors and otherresearcherssuggest that further evidence is necessary to prove this claim.

eat them as a snack or sweet treat after meals

add them to smoothies

sprinkle them on oatmeal for breakfast

A serving of blueberries is around1 cupof fresh or frozen blueberries or half a cup of dried blueberries. A serving of strawberries is around 7 strawberries.

Which other foods are rich in antioxidants?

Bananascontainpotassium, which can help manage hypertension. One medium-sized banana contains around422 milligrams (mg)of potassium.

A serving would be1 large banana, 1 cup of sliced banana, or two-thirds of a cup of mashed banana.

According to theAmerican Heart Association (AHA), potassium reduces the effects of sodium and alleviates tension in the walls of the blood vessels.

TheOffice of Dietary Supplementsadvises that adult males aim to consume 3,400 mg of potassium daily and adult females — 2,600 mg.

Other potassium-rich foods include:

People with kidney disease should consult a doctor before increasing their potassium intake, as too muchcan beharmful.

Drinkingbeet juicemay reduce blood pressure in the short and long term because it contains dietary nitrate.

According to a2022 systematic review, research shows that nitrate from beetroot juice lowers systolic blood pressure in people with arterial hypertension but does not affect diastolic blood pressure.

Tips for use include:

drinking 1 glass of beet juice per day

adding beets to salads

preparing beets as a side dish

A serving of beet is around1 cupof raw, cooked, or juiced beets.

Cacao, an ingredient indark chocolate, contains flavonoids, an antioxidant. Flavonoids may help reduce blood pressure, according to theAHA.

However, it notes that a person may not be able to consume enough flavonoids in dark chocolate to experience significant benefits.

The AHA says that a small amount of chocolate from time to time can be part of a balanced diet. It advises, however, that people eat it because they enjoy it, not for health reasons.

A daily serving ofkiwican reduce systolic blood pressure, among other benefits, according to a2022 randomized control trial.

People who ate 2 kiwis per day before breakfast for 7 weeks had a reduction of 2.7 millimeters of mercury (mmHg) in systolic blood pressure compared to a control group.

Kiwis are also rich invitamin C. A2020 meta-analysissuggests that vitamin C supplementation significantly reduced blood pressure in people with primary hypertension.

Kiwis are easy to add to lunches or smoothies.One cupof kiwi, or 2–3 kiwifruits, makes up 1 serving.

Which other foods contain vitamin C?

Watermeloncontains an amino acid called citrulline.

The body converts citrulline to arginine, and this helps the body produce nitric oxide, a gas that relaxes blood vessels and encourages flexibility in arteries. These effects aid blood flow, which can lower high blood pressure.

A small2023 controlled crossover triallooked at the effects of watermelon juice on blood pressure in young, healthy adults. They found that watermelon juice lowered systolic blood pressure over two hours.

Similarly, a2023 meta-analysissuggests research up to 2021 supports watermelon’s blood pressure-lowering effects. However, the authors highlight the need for more trials with larger sample sizes.

In a small2019 study, 27 people consumed either watermelon juice or another drink before exercise. The females who drank watermelon juice did not experience a rise in blood pressure after exercise, although the males did.

People can consume watermelon:

in salads, including fruit salads

in a chilled watermelon soup

One serving of watermelon is1 cupof chopped fruit or 1 slice of around 2 inches.

Oatscontain a type of fiber called beta-glucan, whichmay benefitheart health, including blood pressure.

A2020 rodent studyfound that beta-glucan and avenanthramide C, both present in oats, reduce levels of malondialdehyde, a marker of oxidative stress in hypertensive rats.

These results suggest that ingredients present in oats can help prevent high blood pressure and protect heart health in other ways. However, further research on human subjects is necessary.

Ways of eating oats include:

having a bowl of oatmeal for breakfast

using rolled oats instead of breadcrumbs to give texture to burger patties

sprinkling them on yogurt desserts

8. Leafy green vegetables

Leafy green vegetablesare rich in nitrates, which help manage blood pressure.

Research from 2021suggests that eating at least 1 cup of green leafy vegetables daily can lower blood pressure and reduce the risk ofcardiovascular disease.

Examples of leafy greens include:

To consume a daily dose of green vegetables, a person can:

stir spinach into curries and stews

sauté Swiss chard withgarlicas a side dish

bake a batch of kale chips

A serving of fresh leafy greens is2 cupsof fresh leaves or 1 cup of cooked leafy greens.

Garlic has antibiotic and antifungal properties, many of which may be due to its main active ingredient, allicin.

A2020 reviewconcludes that garlic in general, and specifically Kyolic garlic, can reduce:

Garlic can enhance the flavor of many savory meals, including stir-fries, soups, and omelets. It can also be an alternative to salt as a flavoring.

Fermented foodsare rich inprobiotics, which are beneficial bacteria thatmay help manageblood pressure.

In2020, researchers analyzed data from 11,566 adults ages 50 or older in Korea. The results suggest that women who had gone through menopause and ate fermented soy foods had a lower risk of hypertension. However, this did not appear to be true for men.

Sodium is a risk factor for high blood pressure, andexperts advisepeople to limit their salt intake. However, a2017 studydid not find that eating salt-fermented vegetables increased the risk of high blood pressure despite the high sodium content.

Fermented foods to add to the diet include:

Probiotic supplementsare another option.

11. Lentils and other pulses

Lentils provide protein and fiber, andexpertssay they may benefit the blood vessels of people with hypertension.

A2022 studyanalyzed legume intake over 3.7 years in 7,522 people from the United Kingdom. Researchers associated higher legume consumption of 55–70 grams (g) daily with a lower risk of hypertension. Legumes included lentils, peas, beans, and more.

People can use lentils in many ways, including:

as an alternative to minced beef

adding bulk to salads

as a base for stews and soups

Yogurt is fermented dairy food.

A2021 studylooked at data for people with and without high blood pressure to see whether there was a link between fermented dairy products and hypertension.

The participants with high blood pressure who consumed more yogurt had lower systolic blood pressure and lower arterial pressure than those who did not.

To enjoy unsweetened yogurt:

add 1 spoonful to a plate of stew or curry

mix with chopped cucumber, mint, and garlic as a side dish

use it instead of cream on fruit and desserts

spoon it onto a combination of oatmeal, nuts, and dried fruit for breakfast

Pomegranates contain antioxidants and other ingredients thatmay help preventhigh blood pressure andatherosclerosis.

A2018 trialsuggests that daily pomegranate juice consumption may reduce systolic and diastolic blood pressure in people with diabetes. However, the authors stress the need for further research.

A2017 reviewof eight human trials found evidence that consuming pomegranate juice consistently lowered blood pressure.

People can consume pomegranates whole or as juice. When buying prepackaged pomegranate juice, check to ensure that there is no added sugar.

Cinnamonmay help reduce blood pressure by a modest amount, according to a2020 review. The authors found that consuming up to 2 g of cinnamon daily for 8 weeks or more reduced blood pressure in people with abody mass index (BMI)of 30 or more.

To incorporate cinnamon into the diet, a person can:

add it to oatmeal as an alternative to sugar

sprinkle it on freshly chopped fruit

Several studies have found that eatingnutsof various types can help manage hypertension.

A2019 studysuggests regular walnut consumption reduces systolic blood pressure in older adults with mind hypertension.

A2022 cross-sectional studyalso suggests that moderate nut consumption, 55–100 g daily, may help to manage hypertension in children.

Opt for unsalted nuts and:

blend them into pestos

use them in main dishes, such as nut roast

People should not consume nuts if they have anut allergy.

Citrus fruits contain hesperidin, an antioxidant that may benefit heart health.

In a2021 study, 159 people consumed 500 ml of orange juice, hesperidin-enriched orange juice, or a control drink per day for 12 weeks.

The results indicate that regularly consuming orange juice can help lower systolic blood pressure and that hesperidin contributes to this effect.

People can consume citrus fruits:

as drinks, for example, by making orange juice or squeezinglemoninto water

whole or in fruit salads, in the case oforangesandgrapefruit

as lemon juice, squeezed on salads for flavor instead ofsalt

TheAHArecommends consuming 2 servings of 3 ounces (oz) of oily fish per week, as it may lower the risk of cardiovascular disease.

A2022 research reportby the AHA suggests that consuming around 3 g of omega-3 fatty acids daily may help to reduce blood pressure. These are in fatty fish, such as salmon or tuna, or fish supplements.

Examples of oily fish include:

Some fish contain mercury, and people should check the latestFood and Drug Administration (FDA)guidelines to ensure they do not consume too much. They can also visitthis websiteto check which fish is currently sustainable.

Tomatocontains lycopene, an antioxidant that may be beneficial for heart health.

A2021 reviewfound that consuming tomato extract can significantly lower systolic blood pressure in people with or without hypertension. However, including other forms of tomatoes in the diet did not produce the same results.

Otherresearchershave found that high doses of lycopene reduced systolic blood pressure while lower levels did not.

While some foods may relieve hypertension, others can increase the risk of the condition.

Decreasing salt intakecan benefitthe heart and reduce blood pressure in people with hypertension.

The USDA recommends limiting sodium intake to2.3 gper day for people above age 13.

Although moderate coffee consumptionmay benefitheart health, high coffee consumption can increase blood pressure and the risk of certain complications in people with hypertension.

A2022 studyfound that high coffee consumption increased the risk of death due to cardiovascular disease in people with severe hypertension.

Regular alcohol consumption cansignificantly increasethe risk of high blood pressure.

According to a2021 review, even moderate consumption can cause high blood pressure in females.

TheAHArecommends limiting alcohol consumption to no more than 2 drinks per day for males and 1 for females. The serving size of 1 alcoholic drink is:

1–1.5 oz of hard liquor

Processed foods may contain added salt and harmful fats. A2021 studyfound that people with a high consumption of processed foods were more likely to have high blood pressure.

Learn 50 foods to avoid if a person has high blood pressure.

What else can I do to lower my blood pressure?

As well as dietary measures, theAHArecommends the following tips for lowering blood pressure:

managestress, such as with meditation or breathing exercises

reach or maintain a moderate body weight

Learn 15 natural ways to lower blood pressure.

Frequently asked questions

Here are some questions people often ask about lowering blood pressure.

How can I lower my blood pressure immediately?

There is no way to lower blood pressure quickly at home. However, a person can follow a plan of diet, exercise, and possibly medication to lower their blood pressure over time.

If blood pressure is over180/120, the person should call 911.

Can drinking water lower blood pressure?

According to a small2020 study, drinking more water each day may lower blood pressure, but more research is necessary.

When should I contact a doctor about high blood pressure?

Optimal blood pressure is up to120/80 mm Hg. If several readings show levels are higher than this, a person may wish to seek guidance from a doctor.

Here, read our blood pressure chart.

What food brings blood pressure down fast?

No single food can quickly lower blood pressure. However, some foods may help a person lower their blood pressure in general. These includeanthocyanin-rich berries, bananas andother foodscontaining potassium,beetroot juiceand beets,leafy green vegetables, and more.

How can I lower my blood pressure naturally and fast?

Natural methods of lowering blood pressureincludegetting enough physical activity, limiting alcohol intake, managing stress, avoiding smoking, and maintaining a moderate weight. Consuming aheart-healthy dietis also important.

However, if a person needs to lower their blood pressure quickly in an emergency situation, they may need to take medication. It is important to visit the ER for treatment.

Learn more aboutnatural ways to lower blood pressure.

What is the best fruit to lower blood pressure?

Fruits that can help lower blood pressure in the long term include strawberries, blueberries, bananas,watermelon, andkiwis. Drinking pomegranate juicemay also help.

Dietary and lifestyle choices can help manage high blood pressure.

A balanced diet focusing on moderate intakes of fruits, vegetables, oats, nuts, lentils, herbs, and spices can be beneficial. In contrast, excessive salt, alcohol, and processed foods may worsen hypertension.

A doctor can help someone make a plan that involves exercise, food choices, and other measures to manage high blood pressure and reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and other health issues.