Title: What are the symptoms of type 2 diabetes?
Source: MedicalNewsToday
URL: https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323159
Collected: 2025-11-15T17:07:51.496501

================================================================================

Type 2 diabetes occurs when the body no longer responds to insulin as it should, leading to high blood sugar levels. Type 2 diabetes can develop in anyone, regardless of their age.

Symptoms include an increased need to urinate, increased thirst, unintended weight loss, fatigue, blurry vision, and slow-healing infections.

Managing blood sugar through lifestyle changes, such as diet and exercise, can help prevent long-term health issues related to diabetes.

It can appear at any age, but it is more likely to occur after the age of45 years. In 2019,37.3 millionAmericans had diabetes, mostly type 2.

This article examines the early signs and symptoms of type 2 diabetes, the risk factors, and potential complications.

What is type 2 diabetes?

Type 2 diabetes occurs when a person’s body no longer responds toinsulincorrectly. This is calledinsulin resistance. After some time, the pancreas makes less and less insulin.

Insulin is a hormone that regulates the movement ofblood glucose, or sugar, into cells, which use it as energy.

When sugar cannot enter cells, too much glucose collects in the blood, and the body cannot use it for energy.

A doctor may diagnose diabetes if a person’s blood sugar levels are126 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dl)or above after fasting for 8 hours.

What are the risk factors for diabetes?

The symptoms of high blood sugar in type 2 diabetes tend to appear gradually. Not everyone will notice symptoms in the early stages, but they may appear over time.

If symptoms do occur, theymay includethe following:

Frequent urination and increased thirst

When too muchglucose builds up in the bloodstream, the kidneys cannot reabsorb it. The body removes the excess glucose in the urine, taking water from the body with it.This can lead to excessive thirst and the need to drink and urinate more.

When there is too little insulin, the body may start burning fat and muscle for energy. This causes weight loss.

When cells lack glucose, the body becomes tired.Fatiguecan interfere with daily life when a person has type 2 diabetes.

High blood glucose can cause fluid to be pulled from the lenses of the eyes, resulting in swelling, and leading to temporarilyblurred vision.

A person may notice itching around the penis or vagina or frequent Candida infections. Infections and sores may take longer to resolve because diabetes impacts blood circulation.

If people notice these symptoms, they should consult a doctor. Diabetes can lead to several serious complications. The sooner a person starts managing glucose levels, the better the chance of preventing complications.

Symptoms in children and teens

Type 2 diabetes is more likely to appear after the age of45 years, but itcan affectchildren and teens who:

have a highbody mass index (BMI)for their age

do not do much physical activity

havehigh blood pressure

have a family history of type 2 diabetes

areBlack American, Asian American, Hispanic American, or Native American

Symptoms will be the same as for adults, as mentioned above.

If a child or teen has these symptoms, they should talk with a doctor. They may be signs of type 2 diabetes but can also indicatetype 1 diabetes.

Type 1 isless commonbut more likely to affect children and teenagers than adults.

Learn more about how diabetes affects children and teens and how to spot the symptoms early.

Symptoms in older adults

Around29.2%of people aged 65 and above have type 2 diabetes in the United States. They may have some or all the classic symptoms of type 2 diabetes.

They may also experience one or more of the following:

flu-like fatigue, which includes feeling lethargic and chronically weak

urinary tract infections

numbness and tingling in the hands, arms, legs, and feet due to circulation and nerve damage

dental problems, including infections of the mouth and red, inflamed gums

Diabetes can lead to a range of skin changes, some of which may be early warning signs.

acanthosis nigricans, areas of darker, velvety skin, especially on the neck, elbows, knees, and knuckles

necrobiosis lipoidica, raised patches that may be yellow, red, brown, or darker than the surrounding skin and that may become swollen and hard

digital sclerosis, when hard, thickening, or swollen skin appears on the hands, possibly spreading to the arms and elsewhere

painlessblistersthat suddenly appear

wounds that take longer to heal

frequentskin infections

Learn more about the early signs of type 2 diabetes.

A person withprediabeteswill not have any symptoms, but they will have blood sugar levels of100–125 mg/dl.

Their blood sugar levels are high, but they do not have diabetes. Taking action at this stage can prevent diabetes from developing.

The Centers for Disease Control Prevention (CDC) estimate that around96 millionAmerican adults have prediabetes, but 80% do not know they have it.

Diabetes may cause a number of health complications if people are unable to manage it. Many are long term, but some need immediate medical attention.

Emergency complications

Complications can arise quickly if blood sugar rises or falls too far.

Hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar, is when blood glucose dips below70 mg/dl.

This can happen if a person who uses insulin takes more than they need for a particular time. It can also occur with other medications that treat diabetes, such as sulfonylureas.

A home blood glucose test can check forhypoglycemia.

It is vital to know the early signs of hypoglycemia, as it can progress quickly, resulting inseizuresand acoma. In the early stages, however, it is easy to treat.

Symptoms of hypoglycemia include:

loss of consciousness

If symptoms are mild, a person can often resolve low blood sugar levels by consuming15 grams (g)of carbohydrates, for example, by consuming:

4 ouncesof orange juice

a tablespoon of honey or sugar

The person should then wait15 minutes, test their blood sugar, and if it is still low, repeat the process with another 15 g of carbohydrates.

When levels return to above70 mg/dl, the person should eat a meal, to stabilize their glucose levels.

If glucose levels remain low or symptoms worsen, someone should take the person to the emergency room.

Anyone who has frequent or severe hypoglycemic episodes should speak with a doctor, as they may need to adjust their treatment plan.

Hyperglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)

If blood sugar levels rise too far,hyperglycemiacan result. If a person notices increased thirst and urination they should check their blood sugar levels.

If the level is above thetarget levelagreed with a doctor, the person should do some exercise to reduce the level.

However, a person should not exercise if their blood glucose levels are240 ml/dlor above, as this could be a sign ofdiabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).

DKA can develop if a person has hyperglycemia and does not take action to reduce it. DKA happens when high levels of ketones collect in the blood, making it too acidic. For this reason, the person should also test their ketone levels.

Ketoacidosis can lead to:

a fruity smell on the breath

A person with these signs and symptoms should seek immediate medical attention, as DKA can be life threatening.

People who regularly experience high blood sugar should discuss adjusting their treatment plan with their doctor.

What types of diabetic emergencies are there?

Long-term complications

Keeping blood glucose within target levels can prevent long-term complications.

Here are some complications thatcan arise:

cardiovascular disease

nerve damage (neuropathy)

eye damage and vision loss

Effective management of blood glucose levels can reduce the risk of complications.

A doctor can diagnose type 2 diabetes with a range of blood tests thatmeasureblood glucose levels. Many people discover they have high blood sugar during a routine screening test, but anyone who experiences symptoms should see a doctor.

Which tests do doctors use to diagnose diabetes?

Treatment aims to keep blood glucose levels stable at a healthy level and prevent complications. The main ways to do this are through lifestyle measures.

following a diabetes meal plan agreed with the healthcare team

eating plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables

reaching and maintaining a suitable BMI

doing physical activity

avoiding orquitting smoking

taking medications or insulin as the doctor recommends

attending routine medical visits and blood tests

Someherbs and supplementsmay also help.

Find out more about the different types of diabetes and their treatment options.

There is currently no cure for diabetes, but lifestyle measures can help most people manage their blood sugar levels andreducethe risk of complications. If these do not help, a doctor may prescribe medication.

People who receive a diagnosis of prediabetes may be able to slow, stop, or reverse the progress of diabetes.

If a person is unable to manage their blood glucose levels, complications can arise. Some of these can be life threatening.

Frequently asked questions

Here are some questions people often ask about type 2 diabetes.

What is type 2 diabetes caused by?

Type 2 diabetes iscaused byproblems with a chemical in the body (hormone) called insulin.

It’s often linked to being overweight or inactive, or having a family history of type 2 diabetes.

What is the difference between type 1 and 2 diabetes?

Type 1 diabetes is a lifelong condition where the body’s immune system attacks and destroys the cells that produce insulin.

Meanwhile, type 2 diabetes is when the body does not produce enough insulin, or the body’s cells do not react to insulin properly.

There isno curefor type 1 diabetes but type 2 can be prevented and it can potentially be put into remission.

Is type 2 diabetes curable?

There is no cure for diabetes, but lifestyle measures, such as exercise and dietary choices, can help manage it. In some cases, a person may need medication.

What are the warning signs of type 2 diabetes?

Often, the first time a person knows they have type 2 diabetes is after a routine blood test, possibly for another condition. If symptoms occur, they include an increased need to urinate, thirst, fatigue, blurry vision, and feeling hungrier than usual.

How does type 2 diabetes start?

Type 2 diabetesstartswhen the body becomes unable to use insulin effectively. The body produces more insulin to help itself process glucose in the blood. Over time, the body can no longer make enough insulin, and blood glucose levels rise. This can lead to complications.

Type 2 diabetes often has no symptoms in the early stages, and people often find out they have it during a routine blood test.

If symptoms appear, they include feeling thirsty and needing to urinate more often, having frequent infections, fatigue, and unexplained weight loss.

Currentguidelinesrecommend regular screening from the age of 45 years or younger if an individual has other risk factors, such asobesity. A doctorcan adviseon individual needs.

Anyone who has concerns about diabetes should seek medical advice. An early diagnosis can help slow the progression of type 2 diabetes and prevent complications.